Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to focus on the materials of our pin and start having a look at the various
material properties so we can get it looking a bit more glossy let's hop in and find out more.
OK so this is where we left ourselves off before.
Let's go in and start playing with our materials.
I'm going to just hide my properties panel and tool shelf so there out of the way.
Right.
So first of all we need to go to our materials themselves so making sure the bowling pin is selected
we're going to scroll down and find the materials tab.
We see that there is no material on our pin yet.
So I'm going to create new material and call it pin.
Now it's called pin.
I want to switch over to lookdev mode and remember you can use the Z key as well to do that.
And then the number two or move your mouse to the appropriate location.
And why we're using that rather than render is we don't really have an environment set up at the moment.
So even if we were working in rendered mode it wouldn't really show it off, what lookdev does do.
So we have a look into the shading tab.
It gives us a world that's going to light up our scene as if this pin was actually within that world
itself.
And if we click on that we've got several other options and you will see that if we select that's the
lighting that's on our pin changes dramatically.
And that will be even more so when we have a look at the material and start playing around with the
properties.
When it comes to rendered mode it's just going to look a bit dull at the moment.
It literally is living in a big gray void.
So let's not focus on the rendered mode just at the moment and that's true whether you're using eevee
or cycles at the moment, So I'm going to switch back to lookdev and I'm going to change my shading environments
just a light environment and then we can play around and see how it would look like in other environments
as well.
Now with the new pin material selected I'm going to scroll down and you've got a plethora of things
you can change with your material.
Now the one I want to focus on is a nice straightforward and simple one.
We've got our base color which we played with before and if we scroll down a little further we have
something called roughness.
So the less rough something is the more reflective it is.
If it has a roughness of zero that means it's fully reflective which means it's going to reflect things
in its environment we can see here.
This pin itself is reflecting whatever's in this environment here and we can see it looks like this
is a living room.
If we set it to this street view at some point you'd see the house there is there in our environment.
That's pretty cool and gives us a good idea of the overall form and shape and how reflections will look
on our pin itself.
Now of course it's not going to have quite this mirror finish but if we turn that all the way up to
one that means that this is now a hundred percent diffuse, light will hit this objects or anything with
this material on it and get completely diffused, it will have no reflections to it.
So it's so I'm going to set that back down to maybe point one for the moment so still reflective but
not not quite a mirrored surface.
Of course you can turn that up or down depending on how you're feeling about it.
Now what I have found is that the roughness is very sensitive low down by the time you've reached so
point three point four you've lost all sense of what is being reflected and in what you're left with
is the light itself.
So it's worthwhile knowing that of the first third is really where you need to be when you're talking
about reflections.
Now I'm going to turn that back down as I say to about Point 1 for the moment.
Now I want to make sure I've got my stripes on here as well so there were a couple of things that we
can do in order to make sure that it inherits the current settings of this material because I don't
want to have to go in and then scroll down and adjust the roughness, as far as I'm concerned those two
stripes are going to be the same reflectiveness or the same roughness as our base here in order to
do that.
I'm going to scroll back up and add in a new material slot.
So as we've experienced before any object can have more than one material slot.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to browse my materials rather than creating a new one I'm going
to browse for the pin.
So now we have two identical materials.
If I was to change one it would change the other.
I'm going to click the number two that has appeared the number of users that use this data.
And by doing that it would create one called pin 0 0 1 with all of the previous setup down here which
is really useful and I can call that pin stripes.
Now this is where I got pinstripes from wasn't it thinking about is the stripes that are on the
pin OK.
Now I need to go through and change the base color and it's not going to be white anymore so it's going
to be probably red.
Okay.
Let's put it to red.
And of course there's nothing there yet.
We need to go into edit mode on our pin and pick with face select a couple of areas that we want it
to be on and then assign that's let's go and tab out back into object mode.
And there we go.
We've pretty much got everything sorted but not quite.
If we have a look at the pin reference itself we see that.
Oh I'm hideously off at the moment when it comes to those actual stripes and I'm pretty sure that the
geometry won't allow us to line those up perfectly.
Of course that will be your challenge.
Okay.
And your challenge is to give your pin two material slots one for the pin and one for the stripe.
Then we'll need to edit some of the geometry because what I'd like to do is align your geometry
with your reference material so that you can assign the stripe material to the right place on your object
and then set your roughness values between nought point one and nought point two.
That's roughly the right ballpark we're looking at.
Of course you can pick your own stripe color etc..
That's entirely up to you.
I'm probably going to stick with red as I go forward.
Okay.
Pause the video now and give that a go. Okay everybody, Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and sort out our pin and actually bring it to life and make it look more like the reference
material. OK so we're over in our pin right.
I think I'm going to set a base material for this first and then come back for the stripes later.
So let's go for a material create it.
Call it a pin.
I'm going to scroll down and I'm going to be literal here and we set the roughness to nought points
1 5.
That's smack bang in the middle of the suggested fingers and the surface color not the subsurface the
base color.
Here we go.
I'm going to leave it says this brighter white color.
I think that's a good starting point to be in.
Okay.
So that's all that set up.
Now I'm gonna faff around the geometry itself and make sure of it's lined up and I say faff about because
it can quite easily turn into a bit of a faff.
Let's see what it looks like.
Ah the bottom ones almost perfect we just need to shift this section of geometry.
This bit here down and we're sorted.
Let's have a look up, Let's pan ourselves up.
No that's.
That won't do.
So we need to do a bit of fiddling around here to make that work.
Let's go down to this one here.
Some use border select a box select select everything.
there but of course it won't have selected things on the other side.
So that's something to watch out for when you're doing that.
I'm going to press Z and go into a wireframe then when I do do that we can see that it's got everything
selected and I'm going to zoom out show nothing else selected there.
OK so what I can do there is not only just press the G key and move down but i can press the G key twice.
And what that will do is that it will slide.
So we've used slide before we talked about it in the previous section.
And that is one of the great uses for it because as you can see it keeps the overall shape that we had
before rather than just moving the geometry up and down.
Now this one here is a little bit more complex because I want to make sure my geometry is also evened
out as well.
So there's a couple of options that we've got here.
In fact I think what we could probably get away with is a dissolve as well.
So I'm going to try but I'm going to select this middle edge loop here by holding down alt and selecting,
even though it's on vertex select it knows what I want, I'm going to press X and dissolve edges and then going to
grab this top edge loop press the G key twice and bring it down and then I'm going to do the same on
the bottom edge loop and bring it up.
This is why edge loops and face loops are phenomenal.
It's enabled us to edit this model effortlessly and bring the geometry back to where we want it to be.
And that cannot be understated the amount of time that will save you.
And that's that's fundamentally why edge loops and face loops are really really important.
Now I don't have a new material to assign to these new faces yet so I'm going to go ahead and create
that and I'm going to create it by first creating the material slots selecting the original material
and it's greyed out.
Why is it greyed out.
Well you may have remembered we've come across this before.
If we tab out we'll be able to make it a single user.
And then I'm going to call it a pin stripe.
Okay perfect.
I'm going to set that to an orangey red around.
They're looking good now I can go back into edit mode and we face select and get a hold down alt again
and select this face loop here.
I'm going to hold down shift and select the next face loop as well once that's done making sure that
pinstripe is the material slot that selected I should be able to assign and then all being well I can
come out and have a look at this and lookdev mode because I've been in wireframe up until that point
I'm going to hit pin reference I almost forgot I was actually in wireframe because the pin reference
was there in the background and look at that, perfect this is coming along really really well I hope
yours are as well.
Really looking forward to seeing how you've gone about creating your pin.
What materials you have applied to it.
Have you gone for a simple stripe like this or perhaps you put a chequered pattern along the bottom
you can assign the manually you can do stripes like I'm doing it's entirely up to you I really do encourage
you to make this project your own and not just follow along with me but really take the lessons that
you've learned and create your own bowling pin maybe even something unique itself looking forward seeing
work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.